♪
♪ Ideas ♪
>> NARRATOR: A master of drawing
and print craft, Sun Xun is
one of China's most talented
and ambitious young artists.
>> Sun Xun is simply
representative of a huge group
of young artists that are gonna
be emerging in the coming years.
>> EMI: He is walking and living
art.
He just never stops.
He really is full of ideas and
energy.
>> From traditional ink
paintings to woodcuts, to
imaginative hand-drawn
animations, his works represent
his mission to challenge the
received wisdom about Chinese
and world history.
>> There's an intelligence to
what he does, and a familiarity
with things that have happened
and what they might mean, and an
insistence on raising questions.
♪
>> As soon as you step into Sun
Xun's studio in Beijing, the
first thing that strikes you is
a series of massive ink
paintings.
(Haunting music playing)
>> Sun Xun's works are deeply
rooted in his own traditions--
Chinese ink paintings.
But using new technologies to
transform them into stunning
black and white animations has
become his artistic trademark.
>> His art is extremely personal
because it really stems from how
he grew up and his realization
of what he thought was the
truth-- one day he found out
that it is not the truth.
>> Sun Xun was born in 1980 in
Fuxin, a small industrial and
mining city in the Northeast of
China.
His father was a factory
worker, which is quite unusual
for someone from a military
family.
Determined to stay away from
joining the army himself, Sun
Xun chose to pursue art with
his father's blessing.
>> Sun Xun went to the China
Academy of Fine Arts in
Hangzhou to study printmaking.
But the medium wasn't enough
for the restlessly creative
16-year-old to express himself.
Coupled with his burgeoning
interest in moving images,
Sun Xun had a first go at
hand-drawn animation.
>> Sun Xun's animations often
explore and question what is
known about Chinese history.
While he did not live through
China's cultural revolution, he
was exposed to clashing
accounts of what had happened
during that period.
It is his struggle to reconcile
these conflicting narratives
that forms the foundation of
much of Sun Xun's art.
>> Sun Xun is an artist who's
deeply interested in kind of the
drama of the way history
unfolds and how it gets written.
So I think he's found a way
through animation to, you know,
to tell stories that are really
fables about very archetypical,
uh, characters.
And I think that the people find
that quite appealing.
>> Sun Xun's breakthrough film
was completed a year after his
art school graduation in 2005.
Combining his fascination with
Chinese history and love for
drawing and moving images,
Shock of Time is drawn on old
Communist newspaper clippings
from the '50s and '60s.
At the heart of it is the
figure of a man who seems to be
diving in and out of the past.
>> I think the main message he's
trying to "convene" with his
work is how to navigate certain
aspects of Chinese society which
are extremely traditional versus
certain aspects of Chinese
society when are extremely
modern.
And there's always going to be a
gap between those two worlds and
his work falls within that gap.
>> It was only a few months
after the completion of Shock
of Time that the young artist
founded his own animation
studio called Pi.
It was a huge step for an
artist just emerging into the
art world.
>> There's certainly an element
of ambition to the way he's kind
of put together this fairly
massive production apparatus.
Um, you know, you hear
statistics like 25 or 40 or
however many animators sort of
working there.
Yeah, there are quite a number
of young artists for whom that
would be really the definition
of success.
>> NARRATOR: In just under ten
years, Sun Xun has held over 30
solo exhibitions and has shown
at more than 150 film festivals
worldwide.
It's a combination of his
talent and sheer ambition that
has brought Sun Xun to the top.
>> MEG MAGGIO: Sun Xun has
accomplished a great deal in a
short period of time.
I admire Sun Xun's ambition.
He's really entered sort of the
mainstream conversation of the
global art industry for better
or worse.
He's become part of the art
market.
The art market waters are very
difficult to navigate.
>> But the young artist has had
no difficulties charming the
international art world with
his remarkable ink paintings,
hand-drawn animations and
installations.
In 2014, he presented his first
solo exhibition at Sean Kelly
Gallery in New York, called
Time Vivarium.
Sun Xun was struck by how
history was presented at the
American Museum of Natural
History.
And so, he created a series of
surrealist paintings in which
he references imagery from the
Cultural Revolution, and the
dioramas from the museum--
once more conveying his
skepticism of official accounts
of history.
>> It was not just his work in
America that reflected the
evolution of his themes through
his widening horizons.
Another key work from this
period was created in
collaboration with a
Singaporean Print Institute,
and it was a response to
Singapore's autocratic
political system.
The installation involved Sun
Xun's creation of a fake
country-- the Republic of Jing
Bong, or "The Country on a
Whale's Back".
He created an elaborate
assortment of fictional
artifacts, from propaganda
posters to flags.
With the whale as the national
mascot- an obvious parody to
Singapore's own made up
national symbol, the Merlion.
>> So the project that he did
with us, um, he created a
country within Singapore, and
this is-- even though it was a
response to him to being in
Singapore during that project,
it is really kind of much
broader sense a country's
governed by a person who tells
the truth, but is it really the
truth?
And the things that we have, the
constitution, it's there, but
what is really the truth and
what are they talking about?
So I think in this manner, every
project that he does that has
kind of a political underlying
theme has something of the truth
from the politician's point of
view.
>> Producing works in response
to the politics and culture of
the different countries he
travels to, it is no surprise
that Sun Xun considers himself
a citizen of the world.
>> Sun Xun's saying that he
doesn't identify himself with
Chinese contemporary artists is
very interesting.
He doesn't wanna represent a
sort of national ethic or ethos.
He simply wants to represent
himself, and I think that's a
wonderful expression of
individuality.
♪
>> Here at his studio, Sun Xun
is working on his latest
woodcut animation.
The first step is to paint on a
wooden board.
>> NARRATOR: At only 35, Sun Xun
has already amassed a long list
of accomplishments for someone
his age.
In his Beijing studio, he's
preparing for an upcoming
project for Art Basel Miami.
This work will be his largest
installation yet, and it'll
also be his first time working
on a woodcut animation in
stereoscopic 3D.
>> Sun Xun does not know how
this work will turn out, but he
is optimistic.
>> He just kind of, um, projects
and gives us this really vast
possibilities of what can be
done with this old traditional
medium.
So I think people really kind of
accepts that very
appreciatively.
>> While Sun Xun is known for
skilfully marrying contemporary
technologies with traditional
medium, what really sets him
apart is the way he produces so
much work in such a short
period of time.
In the past five years alone,
he's held over a hundred group
and solo exhibitions worldwide.
>> His career's also interesting
on the level of artists kind of
looking for, um, alternatives to
the traditional, commercial
system.
Um, where one produces sort of
unique objects for very high
level consumption by a very
rarified group of collectors
through, you know, mechanisms
like the gallery.
So I think there's a real desire
on his part to kind of shape not
just the works but kind of the
terms and the apparatus of
circulation for those works.
>> But for Sun Xun, each new
work and each new exhibition is
also a conscious addition to
his growing collection of
personal achievements.
>> I think every artist has some
kind of ambitions, wherein to
which degree, I mean everybody--
it differs.
So, but somebody like Sun Xun,
he has done so many solo shows
and he's participated in so many
international festivals and I
think in such a short span of
time, it's kind of a testament
to the fact that he's really
full of creativity and he's
really full of energy.
He can create works that are
really amazing nonstop.
>> NARRATOR: Unsurprisingly, in
addition to his 3D film, Sun
Xun is also working on another
exhibition at the same time.
This second one is for the
Guggenheim.
Here he is at his friend Gong
Bin's paper studio, where they
are making unique pieces of
paper specially for Sun Xun's
work.
>> Sun Xun and Gong Bin have
experimented with making new
types of papers for five years.
They are now hoping to find the
most suitable paper to work on
for the Guggenheim project.
>> Experimenting with different
types of paper is a process
that takes time.
Sun Xun has a few more months
before his exhibition to aim at
perfection.
>> He's definitely one of the
most active artists of his
generation.
For Sun Xun, I think if he
didn't work, he would be so
unhappy.
I think he's ambitious to
create, I think he's ambitious
to make art, he's ambitious to
tell stories.
And how that is delivered to the
rest of the world and to public,
I guess that is through the
exhibitions and projects that he
does.
♪